any Jacobson is a journalist and is the
author of area 51 her current book
Operation Paperclip discusses the end of
World War two and the American
government's decision to accept
high-level German scientists inside its
borders some of which had done monstrous
things this decision accelerated US
scientific capabilities but also bore
into questions it's ethical standing so
to talk about that please welcome Annie
Jacobson how's the sound good thank you
so much politics and prose for having me
and welcome everyone i'm annie jacobson
i'm going to talk to you tonight about
Operation Paperclip and I really want to
thank everyone for coming it's really my
favorite part of the book tour and
really writing the book is just being
able to look people in the eye that that
read my book and and speak with them
about it
so I'm going to take you through about
60 slides and tell you a little bit
about Operation Paperclip and then I
welcome your questions one of the things
that people often ask me is why would I
write about such a subject Operation
Paperclip was a classified military
program it had a public face so the idea
was that you couldn't very well have
1600 Germans running around the United
States in various military facilities or
ultimately in academic institutions and
not have an explanation why and so with
the German scientists came a propaganda
campaign to call them good scientists
that may be the case there were 1600 of
them that may certainly be the case with
some of them and I've actually had
people at every one of my book reading
so far who had a father or an uncle that
was part of paperclip but what I will
tell you is the men that I focused on
had very dark pasts and I'm going to
tell you a little bit about that so how
did I report the story I was originally
working on this book my first book area
51 when I came across these two aircraft
designers and they were the Horten
breath
they designed this aircraft the Horten
all wing five and you can see it looks
remarkably like the b-2 stealth bomber
and when I first saw those two images
next to one another
I suddenly realized without very much
more explanation how much technology we
in fact got from the Reich and I wanted
to know more what I learned was that the
wall the Horton brothers were overlooked
for paperclip their boss was not this is
their boss this is Colonel Siegfried
Kanaya Meyer he was one of the Reich's
top 10 pilots and he flew on spy
missions this photograph here is K Mir
about to fly over Norway to choose
bombing targets and Kanaya Meier you see
that's his paperclip photo there and
when I learned
Kanaya Meyer came to the United States I
wondered how you could go from having
Hermann Goering as your boss as he was
now keep in mind Goering was in charge
of the German air force the Luftwaffe
Kanaya Meyer was so important to Goering
that in documents he refers to him as my
boy so the question for me in my mind
was how do you have this is your boss
and then suddenly have the Pentagon as
your boss I learned that when Kanaya
Meyer retired from the US Air Force in
the mid 70s he was given the Department
of Defense distinguished civilian
service award and that is the highest
award that a scientist can get from the
Defense Department and I wanted to know
how this could be I tracked down one of
Keio Meyers grandchildren who
courageously agreed to share the story
of his grandfather with me including a
box of papers that he had in the attic
and one of the most interesting things
that Dirk Nia Meyer said to me and made
me know that I wanted to write this
story to research and report it was he
said and he many of my family members
say do not speak about Siegfried's past
but he being my age said you know a
Google search very quickly reveals that
coneja Meyer was gorings right-hand man
and he
said he would rather know the truth
about his grandfather then not know it
and so that was one example of a seed
planted that I knew there is more to be
learned about Operation Paperclip I'm
going to take you back briefly to the
fall of 1944 this is Germany there in
dark blue and of course the Allies have
landed at Normandy Normandy they're
going at Germany this way the Soviets
are coming this way and immersed inside
the army soldiers are a group of
scientists
Liat led by a particle physicist named
samuel goudsmit and that operation was
sort of the precursor to paperclip it
was called Operation Alsace
Samuel good Smith and his team have one
mission that is to find out about what
was known as ABC weapons atomic
biological and chemical they find out
very quickly that Hitler's atomic
program is not what that we had feared
that was lucky for us but as Hitler told
his warn weapons minister Albert Speer
nuclear science is Jewish science this
is what Hitler said and therefore that
atomic program had not progressed the
same way that the biological and
chemical weapons had very quickly samuel
goudsmit in a small hook in a small
apartment in Strasbourg France learns
about this man
dr. Kurt Blum the deputy Surgeon General
of the Reich and he also learns about
this man dr. Walter Schreiber the
Surgeon General of the Third Reich
what good Smits finds and these papers
that I looked at were remarkable because
they're just a sort of seemingly benign
correspondence between scientists the
apartment belonged to a doctor named dr.
Egan Hagen once a temperate man worked
in the United States on a Rockefeller
Foundation Scholarship and Hagen was
writing to Himmler and saying of the
hundred prisoners you sent me a group of
them died in transport please send more
and this is a terrifying moment for
operational sauce because they realize
that
the Reich is experimenting on humans
from the concentration camps
to push medical science in a manner that
cannot be pushed if you're experimenting
on rabbits and guinea pigs
so dr. Bluhm and dr. schreiber are now
on the top of the target list for
operation Alsace and ultimately
paperclip there you have Hitler and
Goering and of course the third horrible
triad of this group of folks who are in
the target eye of the Allies is Himmler
and Himmler is overseeing a vast network
of state-sponsored slavery and it's the
slaves from the concentration camps that
are assembling the weapons so you have
prisoners being experimented on for some
for some of the programs and you have
prisoners being used to build rockets
and such for the other weapons programs
as we're moving across Germany all
across the Reich the Allies are coming
across hidden troves of treasure like
this this is a famous photograph of gold
but also in these caves Allies are
finding documents and they're finding
weapons and this is one example this
little innocuous-looking entrance is
actually the entrance to Nordhausen
which was the underground tunnel
facility where Warner von braun general
dornberger and many other scientists who
would later come to america are working
to build the rockets for the Reich so
you see down on the bottom photograph
those are train tracks the rocket parts
would go in the slave laborers would
build them and out of the tunnels on
those trains would come v2 rockets and
body parts this is the v2 rocket so one
of our teams was sent in these men were
sent to capture a hundred rockets and to
ship them back to the United States so
that we could fly them here at the White
Sands Missile Range but this is where
you really see Operation Paperclip begin
because also
at the same time you have the scientists
and you see that an intelligence officer
the program sort of begins in bits and
pieces and one intelligence officer says
we have the Rockets but how about the
scientists this is von Braun this is
dornberger and two others who I write
about in paperclip what's left out of
the issue is that dornberger you can see
here he's with Himmler they're both went
wearing leather coats I find this
photograph remarkable I was not able to
get permission to publish it in my book
I'm happy to show it to you here
general dornberger went on and became a
very important part of the paperclip
program he worked for Bell Aircraft for
years he had one of the highest
clearances at the Pentagon he was a
recruiting officer for paperclip and
nothing was ever mentioned of his past
and this photograph was certainly kept
hidden for a rather long time
Arthur Rudolph George Rickey and
dornberger those are all their paperclip
photographs part of what I write about
in the book is how the US military was
complicit and this is a great moral
conundrum because we were complicit in
needing these scientists to be put forth
as the good Germans as the benign
scientists who somehow were hiding out
from the from the Reich but of course we
know from the photograph with general
dornberger that is a fiction and for
example nearby at Nordhausen was the
Buchenwald concentration camp when I
traveled to Germany this to research the
book you know this sign really comes
came came across to me as as really
remarkable and and something I thought
about often it says Yatim das zina it's
an old German proverb and it means does
everyone get what they deserve and I
often wondered as I was researching and
reporting this question exactly that the
scientists were taken to this castle
ironically this had been Goering one of
gorings Luftwaffe headquarters it's
outside Frankfurt and
when I went there also to speak to the
old-time caretaker he had lots of
stories which I write in the book about
what it was like when the US military
took over and set up all the scientists
that we were collecting throughout the
ruins of the Reich we set them up in
this facility and we began to interview
them these are a number of the
scientists who were in at it was called
dustbin dustbin a little humor by the
Allies there but these are some of the
scientists who were kept there one of
the scientists we couldn't find it first
was dr. Ambrose Ambrose I think is
probably the most nefarious character
that I write about in the book and I'm
going to tell you briefly why Ambrose
was Hitler's favorite chemist and I
don't say that lightly
I found a document in the National
Archives that I don't believe it had
ever been been reported before it shows
an award that Ambrose was given by
Hitler of 1 million Reichsmarks and the
reason that Ambrose was given that was
because he was he invent co-invented
sarin gas the a in sarin stands for
Ambrose but he also invented synthetic
rubber for the Reich and this was a very
big deal to Hitler tanks need treads
aircraft need tires Hitler knew the
Reich was running out of rubber and so
when Ambrose invented rubber the Fuehrer
bestowed him with favor in the form of
this giant financial reward Ambrose was
also put in charge of a slave labor
factory none other than at Auschwitz and
this is an Allied intelligence photo of
the Auschwitz Birkenau complex in June
of 1944 it's a little hard to interpret
to the naked eye but because it's from
so high up but you see there's a schvitz
up there it's labeled there's Birkenau
and down on the bottom you can just
barely see it says ouch fits three buna
buna is the name for synthetic rubber
and this was where at where Ambrose was
manager and slaves who were spared the
ass chamber some of whom I interview for
the book were sent to buna to work most
of them were worked to death of all the
photographs that I found on my research
and reporting none bothered me to the
degree that this one did it was not the
bodies stacked like cordwood that we all
have seen and have horrified us but
rather it was this and it's because of
what that sign says it says company
sporting club IG outfits and those are
two of Otto Ambrose's colleagues fencing
so after a day in the laboratory they
would go for sport and fence and as it
was explained to me by the academics at
the frits Bower Institute who allowed me
to publish this photograph they told me
that the this sporting event would take
place in the afternoons well within the
sight of the three large chimneys of the
death camps crematoria that otto Ambrose
became part of paperclip is horrifying
doctor Bluma captured by the Allies
begins talking he's the first
high-ranking member of the Third Reich
also close to Hitler he wore the golden
party badge which means he had favor
from the Fuhrer and he begins
cooperating with the Allies and tells
them about atrocities mass sterilization
and gassing of Jews there's a tug of war
going on the science of scientist sixes
is extremely interested in dr. Bluhm
he's in charge of Hitler's biological
weapons program he's been working on a
bubonic plague weapon but there's a
there's a tug of war going on because
here you have dr. Leopold Alexander who
has been sent to Germany not to try to
find scientists interrogate them find
out their knowledge and decide whether
or not they should be part of Operation
Paperclip but rather to look for men
specifically science specifically
doctors who might be tried at the
Nuremberg war crimes trials at the same
time you have Harry Armstrong later the
second Surgeon General of the Third
Reich
Armstrong is interested in enhancing
pilot performance in the United States
the next war will involve pilots who fly
high fast and far and the Reich Harry
Armstrong knows is far advanced in pilot
physiology at this point then the US
Army Air Forces and he wants those
German doctors he teams up with dr.
hubertus strughold known as the father
of space medicine we'll talk about
strughold a little bit later on
strughold was the top man in Luftwaffe
medicine it when I was doing an
interview recently someone said well
could people that were this high up not
have known and the best analogy I can
give you is imagine being a hedge fund
manager today and trying to say that
you're not interested in capitalism if
you were to rise to the top of your
field in the Third Reich you had
knowledge of things and you had a
commitment to an ideology that is almost
impossible in my estimation to say that
you didn't know nevertheless Harry
Armstrong and hubertus strughold create
a partnership in Germany and they hire
these men this photograph never
published before Richard Kuhn is in the
center a very famous Nobel prize-winning
chemist and many other scientists who
would come to the United States as part
of Operation Paperclip
to work in Texas but before that
happened there was a knock on the door
in the Institute where they were all set
up to work in Germany before their
passage to the United States could be
arranged and that was from as I told you
dr. Leopold Alexander he wanted these
three for war crimes as he wanted dr.
Theodor Benziger dr. Theodor Benziger
when I read about his obituary in The
New York Times published in 1999 when
Benziger was 94
the
the New York Times loud at his long
career for the US Navy as a doctor it
talked about how he invented the ear
thermometer but it left out entirely
that dr. Theodore Benziger was part of a
small group of doctors that worked with
Himmler and when Himmler would show
films of medical murder experiments at
the Reich Air Ministry he had dr.
Theodor Benziger do the introductions so
this is this kind of whitewashing I
found astonishing and even more
troubling when I looked deep into the
nrnberg files I found out that dr.
Theodor Benziger was on the initial list
to be tried at the doctor's trial and
yet mysteriously just three weeks before
trial he was released into custody of
Harry Armstrong of the US Army Air
Forces and he was on his way to the
United States part of dr. Alexander's
role was to find witnesses to find the
few survivors of those horrific
concentration camp medical experiments
and put them on trial so we had the
doctor's trial there you see dr. Blauman
in the center he would be acquitted and
he would later become part of paperclip
and there you see dr. Alexander with a
witness who comes into the story later
at the Nuremberg doctors trial this is a
one of the doctors you know someone once
asked me did any of the doctors know
each other and they absolutely did dr.
Alexander part of the reason why he was
chosen to be the chief medical expert
for the Nuremberg trials was that he had
grown up in Vienna and he left when the
Nazis took power so he was a fluent
German speaker and he was astonished to
figure out at the doctors trial that he
was in the same medical class with dr.
beagle Bach Karl Holland Rainer one of
the few survivors of those experiments I
tell the story in the book but there's
so many moments that I came across that
are just lost to history I couldn't
believe that they had never I had never
heard of them and they seemed to not
have been written about anywhere Carl
Hall and Rainer was the subject of the
salt water
experiments and I won't give you the
details because they're gruesome you can
read some of them in the book but
Holland Rainer was so outraged at beagle
Bach who had performed those experiments
on him he came into the Nuremberg trials
with a dagger hidden in his pocket and
while he was on the witness stand he
lept off the the stand and he tried to
stab a beagle Bach and one of the
nrnberg judges was so upset with him
because he said we are here to show what
democracy is all about that he sent poor
Colin Carl Holland Reiner
back into the prison with the Nazi
doctors um
dr. Walter Schreiber hold that thought
he was absent from the doctors trial
he'd been captured by the Soviets
jumping over to another program briefly
and quickly some of the men who worked
for the US Army really felt that this
program was terrible and they didn't
want to be working with Nazi potential
war criminals but there was also a
Soviet threat and they felt that it was
perhaps the lesser of two evils other
army officers really seemed to like
these scientists with full knowledge of
how complicit they had been in war
crimes and that was very disturbing
general Luke's here was one of them
there he is holding an incendiary bomb
and there he is
I found this actually in general Lucas's
personal papers at the US Army heritage
Institute in upstate Pennsylvania and
I'm going to speak for a second about
reporting the story and how stories like
this get reported there's sort of an
idea that you just file a Freedom of
Information Act and magically all these
documents appear and that's of course
not the case I often think of myself a
bit like a detective and that you have
to really find your way to the story but
when I saw this photograph of general
Luke seeming to him joy himself at a
cocktail party with Hitler's chemists I
decided to track down Luke's his
personal papers which I found at the
History Institute and that's where I
found out what a jump forward I found
general Luke's his Diaries
and this is that incredible human
element of it all where you know I keep
a diary maybe lots of you do and you
sort of write like things maybe you're
not supposed to write and general Luke's
wrote you know attended a conference
with dr. Schieber classified matters and
all along the Department of Defense have
been telling me that she burr had never
been part of paperclip
that's Schieber he was SS Brigade Fuhrer
he served on reichsfuhrer SS Himmler's
personal staff he worked on
concentration camps experiments he was a
chemist there he is wearing the golden
party badge I told you about that means
he had favor from the Fuhrer but the
reason that she burr was never known to
be part of paperclip was because he was
later hired by the CIA and they were
able to put a different classification
on his papers so up until this point she
burrs participation in this program was
not known his courageous family members
in Germany also gave me some very
interesting information which I report
in the book but just to show you how
high up Schieber was and why it was
necessary to keep him a very big secret
there he is I couldn't get permission to
publish this photograph I'm happy to
show it to you here there is shaking
hands with Himmler with Hitler in the
forest but ultimately I was able through
that sort of detective work and finding
out about dr. Shi burrs participation in
paperclip and I was able to get that
list and there it is that's the official
list of all the Tiran 'king chemical
weapons experts on hitler's roster who
ended up working as part of paperclip
and just a fascinating photograph of
Schieber that his family shared with me
and that's when he was working for the
CIA so people often ask how could this
have happened and this is why you know
there was a very real threat and that
was the Soviet Union and the threat was
thermonuclear war very quickly the Cold
War heated up and all of those
criminals that we had sent to prison
well we needed Germany as an ally and so
John McCloy US High Commissioner he left
his position as president of the World
Bank and agreed to go to Germany to
serve as High Commissioner and he
released the majority of those convicted
Nazi war criminals they had been in
Landsberg prison those are the unmarked
grave graves of the 486 who had been
hung but he released a lot of them
including Ambrose I found this picture
to be incredibly disturbing that's
Ambrose I told you the a for Ambrose and
sarin gas Hitler's favorite favorite
chemist he was running the managing the
Auschwitz three buna factory he was
actually tried at Nuremberg he was
convicted of mass murder and slavery
there he is an inert burg photograph
laughing with his lawyers perhaps he had
foresight and knew that he would be
given clemency by US High Commissioner
John McCloy released and he would become
later on contract with the US Department
of Energy some of the doctors were such
hot potatoes that was the actual term
that they used if someone couldn't come
to the United States and so they were
sent to this facility outside Frankfurt
it was a black site I sort of think of
it as the original post-war black site
and that is where we worked on enhanced
interrogation techniques with Soviet
bloc prisoners ultimately this program
would become known as the infamous
MKULTRA program but it began here much
earlier than thought and lo and behold
who were the two physicians at Camp King
dr. Schreiber released from the Russians
many thought he was a soviet mole and
dr. Kurt Blome a-- but the reason that
blummo got the position was because
Schreiber came to the United States and
this was one of the most horrifying
moments to research and report was that
dr. Schreiber whose specialty was
actually lethal phenol
injections was a quick way to get rid of
someone at a concentration camp he
oversaw those experiments we knew it we
couldn't prosecute him at Nuremberg
because he was in the Soviet Union and
he actually was a witness for the Soviet
Union at the Nuremberg trials but now he
was on the American team and he was sent
to America to this place the u.s. air
force school of aviation medicine at
Randolph field
Harry Armstrong whose photograph I
showed you he had set this place up this
would become the bastion of era of US
aerospace medicine ultimately and when
dr. Schreiber the former Surgeon General
of the Third Reich arrived in the United
States and here's where circumstance
plays into the story I really love when
fate and circumstance work in a very
interesting way that perhaps justice
cannot Schreiber there's a small article
in a Air Force medical journal about him
and it just describes him as an
ex-soviet prisoner this is the former
Surgeon General of the Third Reich
that's what it says about him a little
hubris that he had agreed to or wanted
to have this article there and who
happened to read that journal at that
exact time at that moment in time in
1951 but dr. Leopold Alexander the chief
war crimes prosecutor from the doctor's
trial and he was outraged and he called
up Harry Armstrong who is now the
Surgeon General of the US Air Force and
says this man is a Nazi war criminal and
there must be some mistake
but there is no mistake Schreiber's
working among these guys thirty four of
whom are at Randolph field working on US
space medicine and they don't want to
have to call attention to this and they
do not want to have to let go of dr.
schreiber
and so there's a dramatic tug-of-war
behind the scenes dr. Alexander decides
to go to the press he calls up a
reporter from the Boston Globe
and says that Schreiber's in the country
but also as fate and circumstance would
have it at this exact time I showed you
this photograph earlier this is a
witness from the Ravens book
concentration camp who was part of the
medical experiments that Shriver was
part of she just so happened to be
coming to the United States at this time
dr. Alexander and a colleague in Boston
are giving pro bono medical treatment to
anyone who is a victim and a survivor of
the Nazi concentration camp medical
experiments she's in the United States
at this exact time just to give you an
idea that's what her leg looked like
from some of the experiments dr.
Alexander and Alexander Hardy who is
assistant prosecutor together wrote to
President Truman and said dr. Schreiber
must be expelled and a little bit of
justice this was the article in The New
York Times as he left for Argentina and
it says Nazi physician leaving so in the
end paperclip those 16 hundred
scientists had different trajectories in
their life I write about what their
lives were like in my book but of course
the most famous among them was Warner
von Braun and Arthur Rudolph who had
been in charge of the underground
weapons facility at Nordhausen where
30,000 slave laborers died building the
v2 rockets he was one of the few German
scientists who was investigated by the
Department of Justice not until 1983 but
investigated nonetheless and Rudolf was
given a choice he could stand stay here
and stand trial for war crimes or he
could go back to Germany and he chose to
go to Germany
Kurt Davis the first director of the JFK
Space Center toward the end of my
research I was learning about Davis he
wore the SS uniform to work he also in
documents that I read through thoroughly
turned over a colleague to the Gestapo
who had for making anti-hitler remarks
and there's this incredible moment in
that in the early part of paperclip
where one group of American intelligence
officers who are recruiting for
paperclip find day basis information out
and they notify the Joint Chiefs who and
the the group working at the Pentagon to
get this different individual scientists
here and they say debuts cannot be
brought to the United States he
deliberately and viciously turned over a
colleague to the Gestapo who went to
prison but the Joint Chiefs say we need
him and he comes to this day the
national space club gives out the dr.
kurt davis award and there is when i
asked the director of that award what he
says when a journalist asked him why do
you continue to give out an award to an
unknown nazi he said that no one had
ever asked him that question before i
think ultimately einstein had it right
Einstein left Germany as soon as the
Nazis took power and his quote was that
the reason he had left was because
science and justice were now in the
hands of a raw and rabid mob of Nazi
militia there he is getting his US
citizenship the majority of the
16-hundred operation paperclip
scientists who came here were given that
coveted US citizenship so I leave you
with the last thought which is yaddam
das zina that sign over the Buchenwald
gate we know from a document that
Wernher von Braun himself would go to
the Buchenwald camp and handpick slave
laborers to work on the rockets so is
that really true does everyone get what
he deserves I sought out that question I
sought out that answer from all the
different individuals that I in
but the best answer that I got came from
now 91 year old Gerhard ma hsiao ski and
as a teenager he was spared the gas
chamber at Auschwitz because he could
work he became a slave labor at buna at
that factory that Otto Ambrose ran and I
said Gerhard you know is it true and
what lasts and he smiled and he pulled
back the sleeve of his arm and he showed
me that blue ink a schvitz tattoo and he
said this is what matters this lass and
it's a record of the truth I want to
thank you all for coming tonight and I
welcome your questions so I'm sure there
are many questions is make your way to
one the microphone well thank you thank
you very much I have two questions I've
also done a lot of this type of research
in archives in your research did you
come across any evidence that documents
had been destroyed or where you denied
documents and my second question is what
does this say about Allied
denazification efforts mm-hmm so the
first part of the question apps
I mean lost or missing is kind of a
euphemism for something which I haven't
quite figured out but Otto Ambrose would
be the best case in point Otto Ambrose
who got that Department of Energy
contract and I think I neglected to
mention the worst part of the story was
that when Otto Ambrose was given
clemency by US High Commissioner John
McCloy his finances were fully restored
so that 1 million Reichsmarks bonus came
back to him and I wanted to know how it
was that Otto Ambrose came to the United
States because he was a convicted Nazi
war criminal he came here
I know twice possibly three times and so
in filing Freedom of Information Act
requests with the State Department
those Ambrose files of those travel
documents he would have had to have been
given special permission always came up
lost or missing and the second part of
your question just remind me if you
would what does this say about Allied
denazification efforts I mean it was a
huge effort you know many people are
imprisoned and targeted yes reeducation
of germany you know massive changes that
occurred I mean well just your comments
and thoughts on the sincerity of these
efforts well
Germany was divided up into four parts
for the Allies and of the part that we
had which had 20 million Germans u.s.
occupation authorities originally
determined that there were three point
nine million indictable offenders they
whittled down that figure to nine
hundred and seventy thousand of that
nine hundred and seventy thousand
ultimately a hundred and seventy
thousand were tried in those
denazification courts that you're
speaking of fifty thousand were held
were given criminal sentences a lot of
times it was work or paying a fine and
of that oh just around a thousand were
put in prison
thank you once the United States and
allies decided that there was going to
be a West Germany many Nazis became part
of the Secret Service Intelligence
Service in Germany in fact as a general
whose name I forgot him
yes he became the chief so Gailen became
the chief immediately after war yes so
don't you think that they were not
thinking about the victims of this man
no not anymore they were more interested
in acquiring the knowledge from the
Germans and also be strong to face the
new enemy which was Russia yes you're
absolutely right and
and I write about that at length in the
book because the Soviet threat was
considered extreme much earlier than you
know then we think it was really in the
months after the war the Joint
Intelligence Committee that reported
information to the Joint Chiefs of Staff
gave a document to the Joint Chiefs of
Staff and said we must prepare for total
war that was the quote they used with
the Soviets and they said it will
involve ABC warfare atomic biological
and chemical so we absolutely the
position was we must get these
scientists or the Soviets will thank you
for your wonderful talk
is there a statute of limitation on war
crimes and are any of these people still
alive today as far as I know all of the
as far as I know all of the Operation
Paperclip scientists have died
the statute of limitations that was a
question that came up when dr. Schreiber
when the when we were trying to get rid
of him after this enormous press
situation happened when the war crimes
victim
you know testified to the FBI that this
was the Schreiber from Ravens book
concentration camp a Time magazine
officer asked a Time magazine journalist
ask the head of the Air Force that'd
that exact question you know and he said
we're not going to start the Nuremberg
trials over so that sort of answers your
question and that was in 1951 also were
the Mossad at all trying to get to these
people does anybody know that having
known many all of the people out of
Argentina could they have not found them
on the streets in the United States why
was that so difficult I don't really
deal with the Mossad in my book but I
mean there were programs going on all
over the Middle East as well
yeah yes yeah you mentioned the Soviets
were interested in these scientists as
well so there was some kind of
competition so how successful may not be
the right word but how did the efforts
compare to the Soviets that's that's a
very important question I mean
particularly with the rocket scientists
because we knew the most about that
prior to the end of the war and there
was a real time crunch getting those
German scientists out of Nordhausen
because that area was going to be in
Soviet control we got a hundred and
fourteen of them the Russians got 200
500 900 depends on which source of
information used but here's the rub with
that the Soviets loath the Germans and
vice-versa because of the war for the
most part and so the Soviets treated
their German scientists as second-class
citizens whereas our German scientists
the rocket scientists in particular were
put up on a pedestal and you know given
leadership positions in the program the
German scientists were considered
second-class citizens as far as the
Russians were concerned so much so that
they squeeze them of information and
then sent them back to Germany at which
point the CIA created a program called
Operation dragon return and they sent
CIA officers into Germany to gather up
information and testimony from every
German scientist who had been in the
Soviet Union to find out what they knew
about the Soviet missile program which
was almost nothing because they were
kept from the information so the end
story of that is the Soviet program went
very well
without the help of the Nazi scientists
which at which you must ask the question
then did we really need them thank you
I'm curious about your access and
researching you've mentioned a few
instances and just your talk about you
know some not being a lot of publishing
and FIFA access to
so if you could talk about the
challenges of that and some more at
length yeah I mean there's always a
challenge but as a journalist you just
or at least the way that I work is I
just find my story however I can and and
ultimately if you keep searching and
keep knocking on doors you you find out
you find what you're looking for I mean
one example I was really fascinated with
dr. Bluhm and dr. Schreiber just because
they were such high-ranking members of
the Reich dr. blooms son spoke to me
invited me into his home he had never
spoken with the journalist before he's
in his 70s he shared lots of information
with me very courageously
you know we all have father issues
that's a real father issue on the other
hand dr. Ambrose you know and mindful of
this money being restored to Ambrose I
found out that Ambrose had a villa in
Switzerland and I really wanted to know
about that money so I tracked down
Ambrose his son but he refused to speak
to me you know we we had sort of a
correspondence a little bit and when I
asked him could you tell me a little bit
about how you present this information
to your family to your grandchildren for
example who happened to live or not far
from where I live in Los Angeles um you
know he ceased conversation with me and
he said that is a private matter there's
got to be more questions this looks like
a curious group yes you want to smell ya
want us to keep in mind the standards of
ethics back then or not what they are
now there were human experiments in
United States for example with
inoculated African Americans and
Hispanics with the gonorrhea bacteria
citizen so I don't think that that the
people who brought the nasties here is
very thick skins some of them probably
are or oil anti-semitic oh you know if
you if you know some of these characters
they may have been you know they don't
quite meet our standards of today
that I think is the great moral
conundrum of paperclip and it's why the
book is so long because I am you know I
profile these 21 scientists and I try to
tell you as much about each of them that
I could learn
starting with what they were doing
during the war and let you come to your
own conclusion about the morality of it
all yes two simple questions one is
witted Operation Paperclip comes and
that name those two groups I was telling
you about the those in Germany who were
interrogating or rather interviewing the
German scientists and preparing them for
passage to the United States some of
them were very much against the program
and so as a means to kind of make sure
that the files got to the right people
the pro paperclip officers intelligence
officers would fasten a paperclip it was
not called paperclip then it was called
overcast and they would fasten a
paperclip onto the top of the file to
kind of give an indication this file
should go to the right person and that
is how paperclip got its name
and certainly the America the German
scientists worked with side by side with
American scientists some of whom
probably fought in the war what was
every action to working with a former
Nazi yes I mean that's an interesting
question some of them were Jewish I
invent I invented I interviewed a lot of
these scientists for my earlier book
area 51 and the idea was that these were
the good German scientists and you know
on average on balance there would be no
reason why you would not believe your
government when they were that you
worked for when they told you that so
the joint chiefs knew about the truth
behind the real information but very few
people outside of that inner circle
really knew thank you
actually that's a really good segue into
my question your last book was actually
criticized a little bit for having some
fact-checking issues and I was curious
to know what kind of efforts you made to
maybe do a bit better for this for your
latest book
well I don't know specifically what what
you're referring to about the
fact-checking but um what I did for this
book as I do for all of my research is
source things in the back of the book
the book is almost 600 pages and I think
the last hundred and ten or so are foot
foot notes and I did that in area 51 as
well so that other researchers can look
at those notes and then of course use
that as a means to do their own research
sure but I mean I've read your last book
and despite the the XP a large number of
footnotes I mean there's still things
where you say you know cursed LeMay was
the one responsible for not by the
decision not to bomb on the Bay of Pigs
I'm just curious you've made an extra
effort on this one over your last book I
think the standard is always the same
that as a journalist you do your best to
to work hard to make sure that the facts
are specific and tie those two footnotes
hi I'm wondering if you could envision
an old alternative history for a moment
and answer one of the questions that you
posed which was did we really need these
scientists so can you imagine what would
have happened if these guys had been
prosecuted and never came to the United
States to build this thing and and and
in other words does the end justify the
means for that question you know I like
to interview current members of the US
military because they're always the ones
that remind me in an important way that
as a journalist I'm never the one in the
position of making national security
decisions and so it's almost impossible
to imagine that situation because the
the people who were in charge of
paperclip the Joint Chiefs and their
staff were in that critical position of
believing the intelligence that they
were getting that
Soviet Union was preparing for total war
and that we too needed to prepare for
that so one would never want to stand on
a pedestal and wag the finger back at
history
that's something I'm I'm always reminded
and I'm and I do try to eat hundreds of
these scientists would five if done
thank you yeah yes yes um your book
treats 21 special cases the the most
notorious probably of the of the group
did you get any sense of what the nature
my grandfather was one of the less
prominent paperclip scientists and he
was a physical chemist to my knowledge
he was not a war criminal but does your
book talk about how the large majority
they were just actually good scientists
or well I would have no way of knowing
if they were good scientists because I
didn't look at their case their specific
cases
I understand these 21 were outrages but
most of the relatives of the other 1519
are running around like me and and could
tell you something about about those
people I mean yeah I I you I would say
you would need to research your own
family history to really know for
yourself what went on during the war I
mean the best example I can give you is
Schieber son claimed to have no idea
that his father was on Himmler's
personal staff um it's not exactly
dinner conversation after the war and so
I don't know I mean but interestingly at
every one of my readings as I said there
has been someone who has been either a
child or a grandchild of of one of the
scientists who came here on paperclip so
no doubt there are other stories to be
told well they were the propaganda
worked because my grandfather's family
was treated very well in Tennessee where
they were relocated
and and he was given a later an
institute at a university and and he had
a he had a good career here in America
he was more than 50 when he was brought
over and he worked until he was 88 and
published and and so forth and and I
mean obviously to sell a book you have
to focus on the most outrageous part of
it but I'm just I'm just wondering if at
any point in the book you you talk about
this this this bigger picture well I do
talk about the bigger picture but I'll
give you another example
Kanaya Mayer his grandson and I have
this conversation often because Kanaya
Meyer was goring his right-hand man so
the immediate rush to judgment so to
speak would be how horrible but what the
grandson and I discuss is you know his
Dirk is his name in his position is you
know my grandfather was an engineer and
he's been called guilty by association
so I understand and empathize with how
complicated an individual story is but
the reason that I focused on these 21
was because I found them the most
interesting and also because I could
access their information
another interesting PostScript is that I
had the son of one of these not
mentioned in your book on my faculty he
had a PhD from from Berkeley and in his
40s he decided he wanted to go back and
go to medical school and he went back to
the University of ohm which took him as
an overseas German I found the whole
thing I told him I thought he was crazy
at this point that point in his life to
have done this but you know they they
considered in German he clearly was on
an American passport and had done been
educated here thank you for sharing that
yeah anyone else yeah I just wanted to
share an observation also you were
giving the figures about detoxification
and
came down to and I certainly see the
moral concerns involved on the other
hand I worked in Iraq and in Iraq uh
with much less justification I think in
many ways as you probably know they
dismissed all of the civil servants
who'd been Baath Party members even
though that was basically a requirement
and it hugely uh it was a great blow to
the government and they dismissed all
the army and dismissing everyone with
guns is a questionable so I don't know I
guess well what has our moral judgment
gotten better or is the answer somewhere
in between I think you're bringing up a
great point which is that always in war
there are these issues and we saw it
then and we see it now and interestingly
all of those one of the first things
that the one group of US Army
intelligence officers did in Iraq was
capture all of Saddam's documents
because and you probably know this and
they're now at the Hoover Institute and
Iraq says well we want our documents
back but we're not going to give them
back because out of the fear that what
is in those documents shows who snitched
on who and who was hung and there again
is the same moral conundrum who owns
those documents who gets to be in charge
of their own past so two more questions
yes yes yeah do you have any idea why
the Germans the local scientists could
not get the atom bomb I mean that a lot
has been written about it and I would
encourage you to read those books but
the what little I touched upon because
of course all sauce learned quickly that
that program was not advanced and I
think in summation that the the idea
that Hitler thought it was Jewish
scientist Jewish science really kept
that program from blossoming the way
that their chemical weapons program I
mean they
had enormous caches of chemical weapons
that we came upon you know bombs that
were supposed to be dropped by the
Luftwaffe loaded with sarin gas bunkers
full of them
hundreds of tons of this why these
chemical weapons were not used remains a
great mystery but that atomic bomb issue
is really many people have written about
that and it's sort of the great
mysterious good fortune that that
program did not advance thank you I
wonder if you could elaborate on what
still mystifies me is the most
mystifying thing you've said and that
these German scientists working side by
side with highly educated people who
grew up in in World War two when we were
brought up to believe that there was no
such a thing as a good German and yet
the and and yet they didn't suspect that
these people who were also educated and
also knew a great deal of science and
also presumably worked in science in
Germany did where they was not one
person suspicious enough to say this
these cannot be good Germans who just
lived in a cave during World War two yes
and I think that that is where the the
US Army in particular became complicit
in that idea because they really helped
promote that fiction and I think that if
there's one thing I really sought out to
do and I hope I did do with this book is
help reconcile the past in terms of the
fiction versus the facts thank you